Elongated structures (#152)
creatis-myriad/creatis-myriad.github.io: collections/_posts/2023-11-09-Elongated-structures.md

## Heatmap for elongated structures
 
**Representation of a curve as the image of a parameter function** :  

The position of a curve $$\tilde{c} = c(t)+ z(t)$$
with the parameter variable $$t ∈[\underset{0}{t}, \underset{n}{t}]$$ is the sum of the position of the curve $$c(t)$$ superposed by a noise term $$z(t)$$ with probability density function (pdf)

- traces a noisy image of the curve
- can be used as an optimization target for CNN training 

**Description of a curve as a level set**

$$f(x)$$ is a measure for the distance of a point x to the curve : \\
$$(1) \quad C = \{x \in \mathbb{R}^n : f(x) = 0\}$$ 

$$D$$ is the distribtion of a curve : \\
$$(2) \quad D(x) = \delta(f(x))$$ 
- with $$f(x)$$ the distance function, in the space $$\mathbb{R}^n$$
- with $$\delta(s)$$, $$s \in \mathbb{R}$$ the Dirac function. 
$$\delta(t) = \begin{cases}
    0 & \text{pour } t \neq 0 \\
    \infty & \text{pour } t = 0
\end{cases}$$

Now it is possible to convolve this distribution with a filter function $$w(x)$$ and obtain the heatmap :
$$(3) \quad \begin{align*}
H(x) &= D(x) * w(x) \\
     &= \int_{\mathbb{R}^2} \delta(f(y)) w(x - y) dy \\
     &= \int_C w(x - y) dy
\end{align*}$$

> To be faster than while using a numerical integration and to generalize the description, $$H(x)$$ is simlified. They make the assumption that $$w(x)$$ is symetric $$w(x) = w(y)$$ for all $$\vert \vert x \vert \vert \underset{2}{} = \vert \vert y \vert \vert \underset{2}{}$$.

Reviewer: than what ?

Author: than when using a numerical integration

Reviewer 2: I think the phrasing can lead to some confusion (I had the same initial reaction as Nicolas), so I would suggest maybe something like (+ a fix to a typo in _simplified_ and _symmetric_ :wink:):
```suggestion
$$H(x)$$ is simplified to i) be faster than when using a numeical integration, and ii) to generalize the description. They make the assumption that $$w(x)$$ is symmetric $$w(x) = w(y)$$ for all $$\vert \vert x \vert \vert \underset{2}{} = \vert \vert y \vert \vert \underset{2}{}$$.
```

If $$C$$ is an infinite straight line, the evaluation of the integral simplifies to $$h : \mathbb{R} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$$ which only depends on the distance to the line C : 

> $$(4) \quad H(x)= h(f(x))$$

Reviewer: I'm not so sure what is h(.) as it has not been defined before

Author: just above "the evaluation of the integral simplifies to h"

(4) will be used in the general case as an approximation for the integral in (3).

## Numerical approximation and implementation

> ![](/collections/images/elongated_structures/fig_2.jpg)

Reviewer: I think this image could be bigger

Here are the different steps of this approximation of a convolution by a distance dependent function : 

- **data point :** description of the original structure with a finite set of data points
- **curve approximation** : the data points are used to derive a functional curve approximation by performing a smooth parametric B-spline interpolation
- **restricting calculation** to a “compact hull” or close region to the curve because only spatial positions within a limited distance to the curve are relevant
- **sampling the interpolating function** : selecting a set of points from the B-spline curve created
- **form a 2D Polyline** : sequence of connected line segments, approximation of the original curve.
- **bounding box around each segment** (minimum enclosing box)
- **calculate distance value for each spatial position inside** : distance from the spatial position to the original curve
- **heatmap calculation** : resolve multiple distance estimates from overlapping bounding boxes then evaluate the distance values with the distance dependent function.

> **Curve parameterization**

Reviewer: Is this the following of the previous list ? If not maybe it would be clearer to add a small sentence to indicate what is going on

Approximate spline to be less sensitive to label or sampling noise. And use the arc-length parametrization method because there is not assumption on the curve type and potential physical constraints.

**Local distance estimation**
Create a local hull by constructing the smallest enclosing box for each segment.
Within each bounding box, the point-to-line distance is calculated for every contained spatial location x. The bounding boxes will overlap for non-zero curvatures $$k>0$$ or if the curve is self-intersecting &rarr; multiple distance estimates.

To map $$\underset{x}{f}$$ to a single distance scalar that can be evaluated with $$h(·)$$, there is two options for a reduction function $$h^∗(\underset{x}{f})$$ :
- Minimum distance : only the estimator with the smallest point-to-line distance is used for evaluating the distance-dependent function. Easily parallelized, it allows the heatmap generation algorithm to be executed at linear time complexity
- Inverse distance weighting (IDW) : allows the contribution of all distance estimates.

> **Selection of the distance-dependant function**

Reviewer: is this h ?

- frequently observed signal/noise shapes (Gaussian, Laplace, cosine)
- versatile in their encoding characteristics (triangular, rectangular)
- custom signal shape in the form of a simulated hollow-core catheter profile

**Extension to 3D**
The local hull is approximated by extending the two-dimensional bounding boxes to right rectangular prisms.

## Signal extraction and evaluation metrics

Two post-processing protocols for signal recovery and evaluation, with specific curve type and dataset : 

> ### Center-line extraction and ASSD comparison

Reviewer: I would add a little bit more context here

Signal estimation as a set of point + post-processing the estimation : 
- turn it to a binary image (using Otsu’s method, automatic image threshpolding)
- transform into a curve with uniform width using medial axis transformation

ASSD between two curves $$C$$ and $$C'$$, 
- minimum euclidiean distance of point $$x$$ in curve $$C$$ to point $$x'$$ on curve $$C'$$ :
$$d(x, C') = \underset{x′ \in C′}{min} \vert \vert x − x' \vert \vert \underset{2}{}$$ 
- evaluating this distance for every point $$x \in C$$ and $$x' \in C'$$ and averaging the resulting distance values :  

$$ASSD = \frac{1}{|C| + |C'|}*(\underset{x \in C}{\Sigma}d(x, C') +\underset{x' \in C'}{\Sigma}d(x, C')d(x', C) )$$ 

Advantage : invariant to the width and distribution of the simulated signal and estimated heatmap

Limitations :
- noisy and self-intersecting heatmap estimates, the thinning can cause branching artifacts 
- larger signal or heatmap width, longer subsidiary branch
- effect is negligible as most errors are caused by signal fragmentation in ambiguous regions

### Non-maximum suppression of the heatmap, morphological thinning and F-measure

> Interpret the heatmap as a noisy curve probability map :

Reviewer: A question of interest for me: how do they transform the distance (\in R) to probability (\in [0, 1] ?

- refine the curve estimation using non-maximum suppression (NMS), keep the stronger indicator of a curve’s presence within a certain radius $$r_{spr}$$
- convert probability in heatmap to binary curve label with a probability threshold
- iterative thinning to get a curve with uniform width

> Calculate the minimum-cost correspondence (Euclidiean distance) between point on the two curve. Then calculate Precision and Recall to compute F-measure $$F=\frac{2PR}{P+R}$$. Assess how well the estimated curve matches the real one.Select the best curve threshold across all images (either at optimal dataset scale ODS or optimal image scale OIS &rarr; ensuring different scale consideration)

Reviewer: I think you have to specify which F-measure you are using, here it's F1, also F1-measure=Dice, I think everyone is more used to the Dice naming than F1 (i might be wrong)

## Neural network architecture 

> network's parameters are initialized using the He initialization strategy

Reviewer: I think this kind of things is implementation details and could be removed for a post (c.f. our discussion on the "synthetic" aspect of biblio review)

cost function by default Mean Square Error but BCE is used in segmentation experiment 

> *2D experiments* : Single Hourglass Module (standard model for heatmap-based landmark detection), specific configurations include a feature root of 128, ReLU activation functions, and instance normalization layers to handle varying contrast levels.

Reviewer: what is a "feature root of 128 ?", again I think the activation functions and normalization could be removed, but maybe I'm wrong

Evaluate the model with ODS F-measure.

## Surgical implants in CBCT volumes (3D experiment)

141 3D CBCT volumes recorded across a variety of different body regions (acetabulum, calcaneus, cervical/thoracal/lumbar spine, humerus, distal tibia, proximal tibia, and wrist), down sample (hardware-constraints) + annotations of screw/wire positions, 101 and 40 volumes split.

Optimization with 50 epoch, batch size of 1, learning rate of 0.005.

Evaluate the model with ASSD metric.

# Results

## Analysis of representation properties

**Approximation error for different curvature, heatmap widths and reduction function** 

Approximation yields exact values for straight lines, but it is not the case for curve. Analyze the error introduced by this approximation with distance-dependent weights

![](/collections/images/elongated_structures/fig_3.jpg)

*The influence of the reduction function $$h^*(·)$$*
- Noise and underestimation of the heatmap especially in both IDW schemes (because of overlaping bounding boxes).
- Sparse sampling of the curve reduces the error difference between the different reduction functions but sacrifice precision.

> ![](/collections/images/elongated_structures/fig_4.jpg)

Reviewer: this could be bigger

*The influence of the curve/heatmap width and curbature*
- the larger the curve/heatmap, the higher the susceptibility to errors (even more if high curvature)

> - overlap of the cure with itself (not considered in the reduction funciton or implementation) lead to overestimation of the heatmap (due to high-valued distance estimates)

Reviewer: curve*

*The relation of sampling rate and curvature*
Shannon-Nyquist theorem 
- High curvature in a curve = rapid changes in direction = higher frequency components
- maximum curvature (κ) linked to the highest frequency component by fmax = κ / (2π).

> - sampling theorem requires a sampling rate at least double the highest frequency component → condition r > 4πκ for the sampling rate r

Reviewer: so they limit the maximum curvature ? how do they do that ?

*Impact of the heatmap width*
- sampling quality strongly depends on the chosen heatmap width
- approximation error tends to increase for larger curvatures across all sampling rates
- small improvements in approximation quality from higher sampling rates but higher computational requirements
- self-overlapping of the curve or its noise spread is the main reason for larger errors in the approximation
- high curvatures can be effectively addressed by choosing a small-to-medium-sized heatmap width

## Comparison to related curve representation

Compare the method’s error to that of several related spatial curve representations

> ### Mean squared error on curve points

Reviewer: I think here the title levels are mixed up

- for extremely large noise spread and very dense curve sampling, this representation might be preferred due to very efficient computation with linear time complexity

### Gaussian-weighted BCE
- BCE is typically used for optimizing binary segmentation problems
- a discrete 2D convolution is performed between the curve points and the impulse response of the BCE term
- each position is weighted using a Gaussian probability density function (pdf)
- approximation error calculated by comparing resulting curve with corresponding 1D
- similar to MSE variant, peak flattening and migration toward the inside of the curve (especially in high-curvature areas with substantial noise)
- sparse sampling can also lead to larger errors in regions with little curvature
- minor offsets between the original curve and the approximation result in significant errors (linked to the B-spline interpolation scheme)

## CNN-based estimation error for different signal and heatmap configurations
Signal simulation model and ASSD metric to assess the accuracy of these approximations (*Simulated signals of chest X-ray, 2D experiment)

> ![](/collections/images/elongated_structures/fig_5.jpg)

Reviewer: could be bigger

*The relation between a signal distribution and heatmap distance-dependent function*
- weak correlation between the signal distribution and the distance-dependent function of the heatmap
- Using a rectangular distribution result in worse reconstruction of the original curve (ASSD metric error up to 5px)
- Distance-dependent functions like Gaussian and Raised Cosine work well for different signal configurations
- the custom catheter signal is estimated with minimal error across heatmap configuration
- strength of the signal has minimal impact

> *The influence of signal and heatmap width*

Reviewer: I think you might be using bullet lists too much, not doing lists forces you to be more synthetic I think

- perfect match between the signal and heatmap width does not benefit the representation quality during network inference
- smaller heatmap width is generally more beneficial, regardless of the signal configuration → advantageous for real life application (signal width varies or information about signal configuration is limited)
- rectangular distribution shows the largest error with increasing heatmap widths
- high width cause network to overestimate the signal intensity distribution (especially for Laplace, Triangular signal types)
- BCE optimization reduce a little this representation biais but does not change the error tendency

*The limitations by signal strength*
- signal strength significantly impact the quality of predicted heatmaps (except for rectangular signal shape)
- for weaker signals, heatmmaps suffer from increased fragmentation, frayed edges, and underestimated intensity values → especially for the wide and leptokurtic signals
- small deviations of the center-line during network inference can lead to much stronger mass shifts (affect Otsu threshold and squeletonization and so the quality of predictions)

## Application to 2D and 3D representation problems 
---

> ## Anatomiacal structure detection on knee radiographs (2D experiment)

Reviewer: anatomical

analyze heatmap representations of four elongated anatomical features :
- (A) Blumensaat line (curved)
- (B) mean contour of the medial and lateral femoral condyles (curved)
- (C) plateau line of the proximal tibia (straight)
- (D) anatomical axis of the femur bone (straight)

A, B, C : directly observed (noticeable contrast) ⇒ direct anatomical structure

D relies on the global orientation of the bone ⇒ contextual anatomical structure

> ![](/collections/images/elongated_structures/fig_6.jpg)

Reviewer: bigger figures please

- 3D application are promising but with slightly more error compared to 2D heatmap

*Advantages*
- heatmaps can incorporate prior knowledge of signal distribution and positional noise
- allow more precision representation of structures with known physical parameters
- allows for instance-level parameterization of multiple individual structures within the same output channel

*Drawback* 

- difficulty in modelling the visual appearance of a signal with varying width (naturally non-uniform signals, perspective changes due to out-of-plane components)
- inefficiency in handling dense accumulation of structure with potential overlap

*Challenges*
- no analysis has been conducted to find a method for reconstructing the original signal from the heatmap representation
- thinning approach gives good results in pixel/voxel space, but it is more difficult if the heatmap is fragmented or self-intersecting → even more difficult if several heatmap are close and approximated in the same output channel

*Perspectives*
- it would be helpful to separate structures into separate output channels (even if they can’t be matched between different images of volumes)

> - using a neural network to approximate knots and B-spline curve approximation parameters for signal reconstruction is a promising idea

Reviewer: I'm surprised I didn't see the word "knot" before
